On the planet of Montressor, Jim Hawkins runs an inn along with his mother, Sarah. One day, Billy Bones crashes his spaceship and gives Jim a sphere and warns him to "beware the cyborg". A group of pirates attack and destroy the inn, while Jim flees with Sarah and their friend, Dr. Delbert Doppler. At Doppler's house, the three discover that the sphere contains a holographic star map leading to the location of the fabled Treasure Planet, where the space pirate Captain Flint hid his treasure years ago.

To help Jim search for the treasure, Doppler commissions the ship RLS Legacy, commanded by feline Captain Amelia and stone-skinned first mate Mr. Arrow. The ship's motley crew seem to be heavily influenced by cook John Silver, whom Jim suspects is the cyborg Bones warned him about. Under the supervision of Silver and his shape-shifting pet Morph, Jim works in the ship's galley, and he and Silver form a tenuous father-son relationship. When the ship encounters a supernova devolving into a black hole, Jim secures the crew's lifelines. A ruthless arachnid crew member named Scroop secretly cuts Arrow's lifeline, sending him into the black hole. As the Legacy escapes the shockwaves, Scroop blames an improperly secured lifeline for Arrow's death. Silver, realizing the truth, comforts Jim.

After reaching Treasure Planet, Jim discovers that the crew are pirates led by Silver, and a mutiny erupts. As Doppler, Amelia, and Morph flee in a lifeboat, Jim retrieves the map. Silver, who cannot bring himself to shoot Jim, allows him to escape with the others. Another pirate shoots down the lifeboat, injuring Amelia.

Jim discovers that the "map" is Morph in disguise, with the real map still on the ship. The four meet B.E.N., a navigational robot who once belonged to Flint and is now missing his primary memory circuit. Jim, Morph, and B.E.N. secretly return to the Legacy and retrieve the map. Scroop fights them, but B.E.N. inadvertently disables the artificial gravity, allowing Jim to kick Scroop overboard into deep space.

Jim's group, upon returning to camp, finds the pirates holding Amelia and Doppler hostage. Silver forces Jim to use the map, which directs them to the huge portal that Flint used to conduct his raids. Its holographic controls allow it to open to any location in the known universe. Realizing that Treasure Planet is actually a giant piece of machinery with the treasure sealed inside its core, Jim directs the portal to open to the planet's treasure room. As the pirates enter and begin collecting the loot, Jim finds the skeleton of Flint, holding B.E.N.'s missing circuit in its hand. After Jim re-installs the circuit, B.E.N. remembers that Flint rigged the planet to self-destruct if anyone entered the treasure chamber. As the planet begins collapsing, Silver attempts to escape with a boatload of treasure, but abandons it to save Jim. The survivors board the Legacy, which becomes damaged and unable to go fast enough to escape the planet's impending destruction. Jim rigs a makeshift sailboard and rides ahead, setting the portal to Montressor Spaceport, and Doppler steers the Legacy through the portal to safety.

Jim finds Silver below decks and allows him to escape. As a farewell gift, Silver gives Jim Morph and a handful of treasure he had salvaged from Flint's hoard. Back on Montressor, Jim uses the treasure to help Sarah rebuild their inn, with B.E.N. becoming a waiter. Doppler and Amelia marry and start a family, and Jim, having matured under Silver's mentorship, accepts Amelia's offer to become a cadet at the Interstellar Academy.